On writing to no one
Positivesigner
Positivesigner
Aug 15 · 5 min read





If you write it, they still may not come.

Once in a while, someone wants to write something down so they can remember it later. Those with money and property have a strong motivation to capture sizes and activities as numbers and instructions. Those who work for such people have a strong motivation to learn how to read those numbers and instructions in exchange for food and property. Children are strongly encouraged or coerced into learning to read so they can also get work.
And once in a while, someone wants to write something down to communicate with someone far away or in the future. They would much rather be everywhere their friends are, and be every time their family is. But that is not our reality. Long distance relationships are hard to sustain with a brief visit once a year. A family heirloom has stories attached to it only for those who lived through those times. Writing can bridge those gaps in presence.
No Writing Necessary
Today we have many standard electronic means of real-time communication. Talking on the telephone; video chat; automobile, boat and airplane travel. These things virtually eliminate the need to use writing to keep our relationships close. They also virtually guarantee that people cannot get work without knowing the writing of their employers’ instruction manuals. This is a “skills-requirement inflation” that runs parallel with modern technology’s ease of use. Somebody has to read and write to make automation work for everyone, but almost no one has to learn to read and write to use it.
Now we come down to art. Reading and writing for pleasure has become the major motivation for honing literary skills. Newspapers are going away because most people want to watch or listen to the news instead of investing in the time to read articles. But for many people reading and writing is often an enjoyable experience. Architects have a deeper connection with buildings because they know what the other architects were trying to say. A reader and writer have this intimate knowledge about each others’ goals that can anchor their relationship. It isn’t something meant to be done passively.
Finally, we come to the point of this publication: ASL Sign Jotting. There is no economic reason to write in an unwritten language. By definition, speakers of languages that have no writing system get by with what they do have. There is no love lost on paper that doesn’t enter their house. They can learn a second language, memorize a few foreign language phrases, or just ask for help within their community when outside contact is needed.
Occasionally, there have been times where religious beliefs motivated people to assist and/or coerce certain ones of a foreign people into creating their own literary tradition. Either by conquering their land or schooling their children, unnecessary writing systems have been developed and later adopted by the community. At other times, groups of people using a minority language have invented their own writing systems, borrowing from the majority language. They do this to increase cohesiveness within their community and pass on the stories they value onto the next generation.
Some Writing Desired
I am none of the above. I am not directly involved in a Deaf community that truly values representing their own idiom using text. I am not desiring to force my views onto anyone’s culture. I am an artist who likes to use simple line drawings. I am a learner who likes to take notes. I am a worker who has learned a lot of standard ways to communicate electronically. I am an admirer of codes, and specifically of the alphabet.
As I take notes using computer software, the computer can help me find my old notes by searching for keywords. When using a written foreign language, I can take notes using their alphabet, syllabary, or logograms and search for them using the same. Any alphabet can be coerced into a phonetic writing system with the addition of more symbols / patterns and specific training. A phonetic writing system can be used to roughly write any verbal language phrase.
Sign Languages have not been studied as long as verbal languages, mainly because deafness does not correlate closely with having money and property. Quite the opposite, deafness happens at a fairly consistent rate of one in 1,000 births, which equals 1/10th of one percent of the population. Out of those births, there is a significant amount of deaf people who have more than just deafness to deal with. At least 90% of children born with hearing loss are born to parents with average hearing. And they likely a strong desire to have their children “listen” to them just like they had to listen to their parents as a child, thus focusing on their child’s oral vocalizing and lipreading skills throughout their childhood.
With such a small amount of people who have consistent contact with deaf people who use a sign language, there is little reason to create writing systems for them. There are an estimated 6,000 spoken languages in the world, and only half of them have any kind of writing system. Even those that do may not have many speakers who use it. Those without a writing system are much more likely to be in danger of language extinction — having no living speakers. Their children learned other majority languages and support their families with those skills. There was no need to pass on the old stories using the old language. So there is even less desire to invent a writing system to preserve it.
Hope springs eternal. Some people have the interest, resources, and talent to make things easier for others to communicate. That’s why we have computers, phones, paper, pens, libraries, and many other community-building tools. We can use them to reach out to like-minded individuals and produce something together. Every idea we use today had small beginnings. Nobody knew where those ideas would take us. Don’t let anyone tell you that an idea will never be needed. They are not from the future!
I hope this publication will arouse interest in communicating about American Sign Language using a writing system that represents ASL word and sentence structure. My suggestions here are not practical, nor are worthless. They are one person’s expression of joy at knowing how to see some of what Deaf people mean. Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, and I wish to imitate ASL well by using a writing system that doesn’t cause me to “think-hearing” (fnWDh^z).