If these hands could dance…
Positivesigner
Positivesigner
Aug 15 · 6 min read





There is no limit to the human imagination.
Sign languages are based on the the concept of temporal line art. The lines and circles are drawn in the air using pointers and shapes. Your mind can picture something in your life that relates to these images. Then the signer animates parts of those images — and magic happens! You are watching an entire stage play with multiple actors, costumes, props, dialog, accents, entrances, and exits. This is the real draw for most hearing people who get the itch to learn how Deaf people communicate.
Unfortunately for Deaf people, most of this artistry boils down to an everyday conversation. ASL is simply a different language playing by different rules. It can be entertaining to watch, but most hearing people lose interest when they realize you actually have to learn an entire culture in order to use a language well.
A large amount of ASL videos found on the internet are hearing people using ASL words to (somewhat) say the English lyrics of a song, matching each ASL movement to beats in the melody. Clearly this is enjoyable for the English speaker to do. We love to sing along with the music. We love to dance. We love to imitate. Put all three together and what could possibly go wrong?
In a word, disrespect. Learning a little ASL for your own enjoyment seldom leads people to get involved with the Deaf community. There is a far-too-long history of Deafness being labeled a disability that labels children as failures as soon as they are born. (Uh, oh. Your new born baby FAILED their hearing test.) A visual language is what binds these outcasts. Sprinkling some ASL words here and there in your performances is disrespectful to those who rely on them day. It is nice to show interest, but beware of making it “your thing.” Many Deaf people have issues with people consistently making money off their culture. (Not to mention, something like 2/3 of all Deaf people are either employed part time or not in the work force. And they may enjoy getting more opportunities if you can present them.)
Keep Moving Forward
The entire body is used when communicating with ASL. Features of the face, head, and posture cannot be ignored when trying to understand a signer’s intent. However, most communication with ASL is done using manual movements to make words and sentence structure. Manual movements generally require the hands to be above the waist and below the hair-line. And whether they are simple or complex, the hands will have form some kinds of handshapes. Thus, the first thing students tend to learn is the ASL manual alphabet.
As I discussed in the previous article, the ASL letter A looks like a fist with the thumb beside the index finger’s base knuckle. I write the dom-hand letter A as rnnnn. The dom-hand letter S is written as cnnnn, and the the letter 5 as jlulull.
Before you can use these shapes in ASL words, you need at least two more syllables. First you need to know which way the palm of the hand is facing. Leaving your arms limp at your sides, the wrists will naturally face the palm of each across the body. Your dominant hand’s palm is facing the non-dominant side of the body and your non-dominant hand (or base hand) is facing the dominant side of your body.
This is the position where your wrists are at rest, and any other pitch, yaw, or roll will be fighting against this tendency to return to the resting orientation. When you bend both your elbows, your fingers will naturally point forward and your thumbs will be above your fingers. Looking down on your arms, you might notice they tend to slant toward each other instead of making a box shape.
Using ASCII Art, I think the resting hands look like a forwards slash and a back slash, angled toward each other ( / \ ). Since I am trying to keep punctuation out of ASLSJ as much as possible, I will use the lowercase letter Y ( y ) to represent this resting palm facing direction. Because I am not literally trying to draw my hands using letter shapes, I will use lowercase letter Y for both hands to represent the palm facing across the body.
Except for demonstrating single letters and numbers, all ASL words will have some kind of movement. The most visible hand movements are left-and-right, followed by up-and-down and in-and-out. There are also hands-touching movements, body touching movements, wrist movements, and finger joint movements. Many words combine several handshapes, palm-facing directions, and hand movements.
A simple “thumbs-up” gesture is occasionally used in ASL. It uses the letter A handshape with the thumb extended to the side like in the jlulull. So I write this dom-hand “open-A” handshape as jnnnn, and the base-hand open-A as nnnnj. Whether signing the one-handed ASL word or the two handed word, both hands are in resting palm-facing direction, which is written as “y” for both dom-hand and base-hand. ASL tends to shove the open-A handshape forward toward the audience. The dom-hand movement outward is written with the lowercase letter Q (which looks like a right-hand fist at the end of an arm) followed by a caret symbol (which looks like an up-arrow) “q^”. The base-hand movement out uses the letter p (which looks like a left-hand fist at the end of an arm) followed by the same caret symbol “p^”.
One-handed “thumbs-up” is spelled jn-y-q^. The two-handed version is nj-y-p^. I shortened the handshape spelling because the lowercase letter N is repeated for the remaining fingers.
Stop Moving Forward
The next most common palm-facing direction is out toward the audience. Most letters is the manual alphabet are signed with the palm-facing out. I write this palm-facing syllable with a capital letter U. If you drew a couple more lines down the middle of the U, you could see all four fingers brought together. I use this same symbol for the dom-hand and the base-hand palm-facing out syllable.
A common gesture telling someone to “stop” is waving your spread-apart fingers handshape (ASL number 5) over your head. Although this gesture may occasionally be used within ASL, ASL words tend to be signed below the eye-line between the speaker and the audience.
In front of the chest, this “waving-stop” ASL word can used like an imaginary eraser on a chalkboard — saying “No, not what you just said” visually by erasing your companion’s imaginary drawings. More often the number 5 handshape facing out would be a stern command with one hand, “Stop it right now!” ASLSJ spells this one-handed “stop command” as jlu-U-q^.
You can tell from the way I have to describe the emotions behind the different ASL words that there is hardly ever a one-to-one correlation between English words and ASL words. This is true of just about any two languages, and why fluent translators are worth their weight in gold. This is another reason why using ASL words in place of English lyrics for music videos is a little rude: You definitely aren’t making any sense grammatically, and may even be saying the wrong translation of a word. There are different ASL words for “go run with your legs” and “a newspaper run.” They sound the same in English but are conceptually miles apart in ASL.
So far, I have described four basic handshapes (jlulull, cnnnn, rnnnn, and jnnnn), two palm-facing directions (y and U), and one movement direction (p^ q^). These have been combined to create two different words (jn-y-q^ and jlu-U-q^). There are several more types of syllables that ASL uses to construct words. I will discuss these in the next few articles.
