So much for accuracy
Positivesigner
Positivesigner
Aug 23 · 8 min read





You have better things to spend your time on.
The standard English written language does not match the standard English spoken language. Often times the written code says: “Or something like that... You know what I mean.” This implies that you already know the spoken word or phrase, and the standard writing system doesn’t expect most writers to learn an ever-more-accurate way to write these subtle differences. It’s job is to communicate ideas, not be a phonetic alphabet.
Deaf people usually have a lack of access to incidental conversations when they are growing up. Hearing children overhear their parents talking about bills, entertainment, the neighbors’ goings on, etc. If a deaf child’s parents are not using sign language between each other, to passers-by, when on the phone, or a sign language interpreter is not always present when they watch a television program or listen to the radio (?!), the deaf child goes on unbothered by the world’s day-to-day life.
This frequently shows up in school in “inadequate” grades due to not understanding the context that stories assume readers have. It is a culture shock to the parents when they are told that their child is deficient in basic requirements for passing school assignments. It then becomes an uphill battle to get their child an education, because schools can pass-on a child to the next grade without them having made enough progress. They mark off a checklist of the school’s obligations instead of truly working to understand what this individual child actually needs.
And this isn’t really the school’s fault either. Teachers explain to students that there is a set of instructions to follow for each assignment, but in there is no set of instructions in the assignment of preparing children for adulthood in this world. Success means so many different things to individuals and groups. Due to the nature of human culture, there is no accurate way of measuring outcomes for individuals’ or groups’ decisions. Even if you could, there is no possibility of punishing those who made decisions in society decades ago that started today’s problems.
Change comes slowly, and children grow up whether or not they are prepared well. With age comes empathy for the next generation. Those who have seen or experienced what came before are able to advocate for the next generation. Though we can never truly create a rulebook for what is fair for everyone, we can at least strive to make sure what is clearly unfair for individuals stops being repeated. As Jesus would say, treat others as you would like to be treated.
To be clear, nothing is clear. It is hard to read William Shakespeare’s writing for modern English speakers, just as it would have been hard for him to read stories from a few hundred years into his own past. What you know to be clearly correct today is based upon the context of your life. After a few generations, nothing looks the same.
When I come up with some designs to describe ASL words using a writing systems, I am absolutely sure it is only temporary. I myself am looking forward to what others can create or expand upon to make my ideas a closed chapter. It is said that there are only two kinds of languages: Ones that people are dissatisfied with, and ones that are not used. Between those two extremes, my hope is to come up with ideas that cramp enough peoples’ styles that eventually they will just get fed up and say, “Fine. I’ll just fix it myself!”
Until then, I just keep looking into the future. In ASL, the word “future” implies something far off that you are walking toward. The word “past” is something that is behind your back. They both have the hand raised above the shoulder. The word “think” is literally a finger pointed at the forehead above the eyebrow, implicitly asking you to use your brain. The original ASL phrase for “future” combined THINK and FAR DOWN THE ROAD to create the concept of FUTURE.
Eventually the phrase became used so often that signers combined the height of THINK and the motion of FAR DOWN THE ROAD to become a single unique word FUTURE. The same as the original “past” phrase combined THINK and POINTING BEHIND YOUR BACK, which eventually got abbreviated into PAST. The word FUTURE can be signed slowly, stretching out the time to say FAR IN THE FUTURE. PAST usually uses repetition to emphasize a larger amount of time, becoming LONG TIME AGO.

W = forehead height. C = chin height. A = chest height.
I’m again trying to compare and contrast visual-temporal words using text. I have a way to describe a few handshapes, palm-facing directions, and movements. These ASL words also have elevation above the chest area, specifically the forehead level and chin level. I use the capital letter W to represent signing close to the hairline / above the nose. (The W reminds me of someone’s spiky hair sticking straight up.) The capital letter C represents signing close to the chin / above the shoulder / below the nose. (The C looks like someone opening their mouth wide.) The signs we have already discussed are at chest height / below the shoulder / above the waist. I can use the letter A to describe the an ASL word signed at chest height, but it is so common as to be assumed if no other height is specified.
FUTURE has the jlulull handshape that faces y and moves q^. It is similar to THUMBS-UP jnnnn-y-q^, but the forehead-height W changes the direction of the forearm. When your arm hangs loose at your side, the fingers point downward and the thumb sticks out in front. When you bend your forearm at the elbow, the fingers point forward and the thumb stick out on top. Raising that bent arm at the shoulder so your hand can touch your forehead makes the fingers point upward and the thumb stick out in back. This is basic human physiology, and Deaf people constantly “cheat” with their palm-facing direction to keep their wrists facing the neutral y. As I have tendonitis in both my wrists from typing on computers for decades, I can personally attest to how important not contorting your wrists is to remaining pain free.
This is similar to how Chinese writing cheats on circles. The most obvious circle in anyone’s life is the sun. Do you know what the Chinese symbol for Sun is? Originally it was a square. This is because writing for ancient Chinese people was done via chisel in wood or bone. This makes it tough to create circles of any kind. They decided the accuracy of a circle was not as important as getting things done with the materials they had.
ASL makes the same kinds of choices when it comes to a trade-off between clarity and speed with the human body. Many, many times the official way of signing an ASL word like FUTURE is to raise the hand to the level of the forehead. The shoulder is a large muscle. Over a lifetime of signing you learn to favor not using it. Simply bending the elbow fully to raise your hand to chin height is close enough for such a common word. ASL words “know” and “think” are supposed to touch on the forehead above the eyebrow, but most signers will instead bend the elbow fully while bending the neck down so they can touch just below the eye on the cheek. For any word that is signed at forehead height, don’t expect the signer to have enough motivation to use their large shoulder muscle. It just isn’t worth it to them in the long run, and there aren’t many words that could make the meaning ambiguous.
There is another ASL feature involved with FUTURE: randomly wiggling fingers. If you were counting telephone poles along the side of the road, you could put up one finger for each pole you pass until you get to ten. Then you could put all the fingers down, bend your arm a little bit forward, and repeat this process over and over. ASL uses imaginary time lapse photography to pretend you are doing this process very fast, which would resemble rand snapshots of your fingers in different positions while gradually moving your arm forward. The same logic applies to crowds of people where the wiggling fingers are pretending to count individuals. Eventually, the random wiggling fingers can get abbreviated to just having bent fingers moving along a path, like with the ASL word “crowds of people all around.”
I use the tilde character ( ~ ) to represent this randomly wiggling fingers. So I write FUTURE as jlulull-Wy-q^~.
ASL words tend to use a single-stroke movement for one word, and repetition for a similar word. The word LONG TIME AGO is based on PAST, but uses repetition to emphasize the greater length of time. Actions-thing pairs are frequently created this way. SIT is a single, slower stroke. CHAIR is SIT with repeated, faster strokes.
I use the lowercase letter z to represent a repeated movement. PAST is written as the single-stroke jlulull-Wy-qv, and LONG TIME AGO is the repeated-stroke jlulull-Wy-qvz. The number of repetitions or the slowness of the single stroke will vary by signer and their intention.
The actual handshape in any word particular word is not required to be accurate. Though the standard handshape used in a word like FUTURE or PAST has the fingers spread apart jlulull, the signer may just leave them together jllll if it is convenient for them. Or the opposite can happen where the fingers are normally shown as being together, but a particular signer leaves the fingers apart. That one distinction is not as important to the story if it does not lead to ambiguity of the message. The placement of the thumb is almost entirely ignored in conversations between fluent ASL speakers. The effort of moving the larger thumb muscle is not worth the extra work if they can still get the point across.
So please don’t worry if you see a word signed by a Deaf person that does not match the picture given in an ASL dictionary. One is designed to give clarity of concept to people learning a new language. The other is designed to keep the flow of thoughts coming without tiring out your larger muscle groups over the long run.
This article introduced the ASLSJ codes for Forehead, Chin and Chest heights (W, C and A), the randomly wiggling fingers modifier ( ~ ), and the move hand in / back direction ( pv qv ). Next we will discuss the dom-hand relative direction and dom-hand touching base-hand direction — two sides of the same coin.